I'm Wesley Morris and this is
Cannonball. Today, some old movies from
1990. Arnold, you in danger, girl.
[Music]
Right now, I am a critic of the New York
Times, but I used to be a 14-year-old
boy who loved the summer because I got
to go to the movies on like a Tuesday.
It's hard to overstate what an event
summer movies were back in 1990. Just to
pick one year, not just for America, but
also for me. My favorite movie news
source was Premiere magazine. This
bottle of entertainment vitamins that
came in paper form. Oh,
a prop. Here it is. I've got the 1990
summer movie edition. and they'd count
the movies down from like 1 to 20. I
would spend the whole day reading it,
just thoroughly mapping out a plan of
all the movies that I was going to see
that summer. My mom didn't have a lot of
money to send me to camp, but she would
save up for me to go to the movie
theater. And in the summer of 1990, a
matinea ticket was about $3.50. And I
stretched that 350 as far as it would
go. I'd get my ticket for a show and
then when it was over,
I would hide in the bathroom or just
loiter in the lobby and I'd wait for the
movie to start and I would just sneak
in. And I was always terrified that
somebody would pull me out, but you know
what? Nobody ever did. You know, back
then there were so many summer movies.
There was never not something to see. A
sequel in 1990 still felt like a novelty
rather than the law. To that end, I will
spare you a whole lamentation on the
state of the summer movie today. Y'all
know what it looks like. But here's what
I will say. This summer, the summer of
2025, the top three movies are Lilo and
Stitch, a liveaction remake of a
cartoon, Superman, a brand, a brand like
Craft or Helmans or Saravee, and
Jurassic World Rebirth. Let's just call
it a sequel. The only hit based on an
original screenplay from the summer and
an original idea was weapons, which I
love. But we didn't get weapons until
three weeks ago. So today, as summer is
drawing to a close, let's just go back
to 1990. I just want to kind of think
about the glory days of the summer movie
for a second. My time machine co-pilot
is my friend Sam Anderson.
>> Re-watching it as a 40some year old man,
it just got me so excited. He's a writer
for the New York Times magazine. He's
also a sensitive soul, not unlike
myself, and around the same age. So, he
was watching the same movies that I was
around the same time. And we each picked
a movie from that summer of 1990 that as
teenagers helped tell us who we are and
who we were at that time. And we're just
going to talk about why it was so huge
for us then and what it's like to watch
it now. Sam, welcome to Cannonball.
[Music]
So, I I want to start this exercise by
presenting to you
>> the top 10 movies that came out in the
summer of 1990. All right. So, I'm just
going to go from the bottom up. Number
10,
>> presumed innocent.
>> Okay.
>> Harrison Ford. Did he kill that lady?
Let's find out.
>> Yep.
>> Bird on a wire. Grammatic comedy. Goldie
Horn and Mel Gibson. But it was
different back then. I mean, Mel Gibson
was like, not only was he sexy, he was
popular.
>> Yep.
>> And Goldie Han is just, you know, like
Hall of Fame, great at being who she is.
Uh, Another 48 hours.
>> Eddie Murphy, Nick Noly getting back
together for less than you got the first
time. Pretty Woman,
>> Julia Roberts becomes a movie star. It
came out in like the spring. It was not
officially a summer movie, but it
peaked.
>> It blew up
>> after Memorial Day. Days of Thunder.
>> Yeah. Tom Cruz racing around the track
and Nicole Kidman trying to stop him
from being quote out of control.
>> Um, Back to the Future Part Three. This
is the only pathetic entry, but if you
consider these movies a trilogy, then
we're done
>> because we were done.
>> Mhm.
>> Dick Tracy.
>> This is what passed for a comic book
movie in 1990.
>> And the gimmick. This is Warren Batty
directing himself as Dick Tracy. Number
three,
>> Die Hard 2.
>> Watched it on home home video. Didn't
even bother to see. And what a mistake I
made, by the way.
>> Yeah.
>> Huge mistake. Big huge.
>> Were you a fan of Die Hard One?
>> I was.
>> Me, too.
>> I mean, perfect movie. Perfect summer
movie, too, because it came from
nowhere. Nobody thought it was going to
make any money. And Bruce Willis was
just some guy from TV.
>> And that movie made him a movie star.
>> What year was that?
>> 1988.
>> Amazing.
>> Perfect movie.
>> Hardest I've ever laughed. When I walked
out of that theater, my father, who's a
very straightlaced Lutheran man, very
buttoned up,
>> he turned to us and he said,
>> he never swore.
>> He turned to us and he said, "Yippi cay,
mother, father."
>> My mind was blown.
>> Wow. The great jokes of
>> Did you laugh or Oh yeah. Yeah. Anyway,
you mother father
>> number two
>> of the summer of 1990.
>> Total recall starring Arnold
Schwarzenegger
>> as a man who thinks one thing is going
on but really something else is
happening. Or maybe he already knows.
>> Or is it?
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh and number one,
>> he says he loves you.
>> Ghost.
>> Sam would never say that. By the way,
one of the things about Premier Magazine
that I love, I'm holding it right here.
This is the summer movie issue
>> of Premier Magazine for 1990. And this
is Arnold Schwarzenegger on the cover.
What does it say?
>> Uh the headline is worth the wet. He's
in a pool under the water and he's
wearing a shirt that says premiieres
summer movie preview. It's like, think
about like just the power
>> that was a different world
>> that a magazine had to get the biggest
movie star in the world, Arnold
Schwarzenegger, to put on their magazine
shirt and hang out in a water tank.
>> Mhm. Look how big this object is.
>> Feel how heavy it is.
>> I mean, that's that is that is a relic.
That magazine weighs about six pounds.
And there's a Calvin Klein obsession ad
on the back, which probably turned me
into the person I am today.
>> Oh, right.
>> Sam is holding the page open to Mel
Gibson and Goldie Han in the ad for Bird
on a Wire. But the reason I'm pulling
this out, Sam, is you opened up the open
to the page.
>> They would rank
>> Oh.
>> the top they they were ranked they were
predicting what the top 20 movies at the
box office were going to be.
>> They didn't know because this is May.
This this issue comes out in May. So,
they're ranking their predictions of the
top 20 movies. Guess what's not on that
list? As you flip,
>> Total Recall is
>> Tracy, Days of Thunder. Ghost isn't on
the list.
>> Ghost isn't one of the 20 movies.
>> Oh my god.
>> Ghost is in the back in some other
section like as like
>> things that could be good or things that
could be bad. The They didn't even call
it.
>> So, I've given you the top 10 movies of
the summer of 1990. I gave you a list of
movies.
>> You picked one of them.
>> And I was kind of shocked.
>> Really?
>> I was shocked that you picked the movie
you picked.
>> Really?
>> I did not see Total Recall
>> as the Sam Anderson movie.
>> That's interesting. I picked it with my
whole being.
>> Oh [__] Okay.
>> I was excited when I saw that movie on
your list.
>> You really were? Yeah.
>> It was instant. You had It was like a
no-brainer. like your your homing signal
went right to total recall.
>> Yeah. You kind of tried to talk me out
of it multiple times and I kept coming
back to it. You kept acting like the
show had to be about something else and
I kept going over your head to the
producers and saying, "No, wait a
second. What happened to Total Recall?
That's the film. That's the American
masterpiece I would like to discuss."
>> We should say what the movie's about.
Right.
>> Of course.
>> So, it's educate. We should educate the
people.
>> Yeah. Let them know. Um, Total Recall is
the story of a man named Quaid or Doug
Quaid, which is kind of like your first
red flag, honestly. Like, what the hell
is Arnold Schwarzenegger doing playing a
character named Doug Quaid? You know
what? It doesn't matter because we're
giving ourselves over to whatever this
experience is going to be.
>> Absolutely. And they are asking for that
from the very beginning because yes,
>> which is never remarked on or explained,
but anyway. Yes. So, you know, he's a
construction worker, seems kind of
bored, living in the year 2084.
And he, as part of, you know, some kind
of life rejuvenation, decides he's going
to go have because it's very expensive
to go to the colony of Mars cuz we've
colonized Mars. Premonition alert, we
have colonized Mars. Um, and you know,
Doug Quaid's like, I think I think what
I'd actually like is to go do one of
these things I've seen advertised on TV,
which is, you know, can't afford to go
to Mars. I would love to just have a
memory or a fantasy of Mars in installed
in my brain.
>> Yeah. Well, yeah, that's so he's kind of
a classic
uh bored working man who yearns for
something bigger with his life and he
wants to take a trip to Mars and his
wife is always just giving him trouble
saying, "You wouldn't like it.
>> You would hate Mars."
>> And so he's yearning for it. Yeah. And
he sees an advertisement in the
futuristic subway for this company that
promises to implant
memory experiences in your mind that you
will not be able to tell are not real.
And allegedly you will never know the
difference. They're actually more vivid
and real than than real memories.
>> Station in your mind, but you've
actually gone on the most fabulous trip.
Money can a little bit by
>> credits. 899 credits I think it cost,
which sounds pretty good.
>> And so old Doug gets to the recall
facility. He goes and sits in the chair,
but before they can even do anything,
all of a sudden, hell breaks loose in
the lab,
>> right? Because it turns out Douglas
Quaid has got something going on up
there in his mind already about Mars.
>> Yes, this guy isn't just some
construction worker who is dreaming of a
better vacation life for himself. He's a
freedom fighter on the colony of Mars
>> trying to liberate the place from these
corporate vultures who are bleeding it
dry. Yeah, he's been involved in some
kind of espionage activity up on Mars
already and just and and was drawn to
this memory place and they discover this
and that's when like the floor falls out
from under you as a viewer. Yes. And you
no longer know what's real and and what
level you're standing on and neither
does he as a character. He plunges into
confusion and and has to figure this out
on the fly while he's being kind of
hunted down by secret police and and the
normal trappings of his life are
dissolving all around him. So, I think
one thing I'm curious about is what the
actual moviegoing experience was like
for you.
>> Who were you
>> uh
>> in the summer of 1990? I can't It's like
one thing I was going to say is like why
did you see it? But that's not how the
movies worked back then.
>> No.
>> Like you just went and you just went to
the movies and you're going to obviously
see Total Recall.
>> Yeah. It's like that's like asking like
why why did you choose for the sun to
rise at the time it rose in your time
zone? You don't. I mean precisely
>> why did you breathe the atmosphere you
breathed because that's where I live.
Yeah. So summer of 19 June of 1990 I am
12 years old going on 13 turning 13 that
summer.
>> I remember getting my first baseball
mitt that summer.
>> I uh yeah I was just a dorky little
chubby guy who liked to tell jokes with
his friends.
>> Watched Saturday Night Live.
>> Yeah. uh loved like screw ball comedies,
you know, like Airplane and Naked Gun
and stuff like that, and loved action
movies like every young American boy
should. I mean, I think, you know, we're
talking about the late 20th century. I
feel like the American action movie was
like the great cultural product.
>> It's at its peak.
>> Yeah.
>> It I mean, this is the peak of the
American action movie,
>> right? Cuz when is Terminator?
>> Terminator is 1984.
>> Die Hard is 1988. Yes. Um, right. So, of
course, I went to see this film.
>> Did you see it alone?
>> No.
>> What happened?
>> I wonder if anyone saw Total Recall
alone in an empty theater.
>> I saw every summer movie alone pretty
much.
>> I was in Philadelphia. I saw most of the
movies I saw as a kid by myself.
>> My mother had no interest. My mother
loved movies, but no interest in seeing
most movies that I wanted to see. Also,
I she had to work. Yeah. Okay. There are
other options. For instance, I went with
Chad. My best friend Chad. Why didn't
you go with Why didn't you go with Chad?
>> I see what you're trying to do, Sam. I
did have friends, but I also just liked
A friend of mine once told me that they
did not like going to the movies with me
because I didn't say or do anything.
>> I am a black man from Philadelphia. Do
you know what was going on in these
movie theaters?
>> I was I didn't participate in any of
that. I was a witness to it, but that
was not how I wanted to engage or wanted
the movie to engage me. I wanted to be
fully committed to it. So, I usually
went alone. I didn't want to talk about
it when it was over. Nothing.
>> So, you go with your homie.
>> Oh, I went Chad. Yeah. It was me, Chad,
my brother Pat, and Chris Matias, the
biggest troublemaker in the suburban
town of Loi, California.
>> Wow. Okay. And uh yeah, I remember
people being in the theater and then I
got to say even the credit sequence on
this film and the music, these like red
sort of dripping credits,
>> Smith score. Yeah.
>> The score just even now re-watching it
as a 40some year old man, it just got me
so excited. And you know, we start on
Mars and then all these all the most
cutting edge special effects, people's
faces bugging out their eyes. There's so
much kind of like body horror in this
film,
>> eyes bugging out because the Martian
atmosphere and the mayhem starts as you
say pretty quickly and it's classic Paul
Verhovven
just like meat chaos, right? kill them
all.
>> And I think we were probably screaming
our heads off at just
>> how amazing this spectacle was.
>> Yeah.
>> In every way and how it just fulfilled
all our greatest fantasies of what a
film should be and what life in the
future should be. just like people
getting ripped up by bullets in a way
that
12-year-old me would just could not have
been more excited. There was all that
and then there were just these iconic
effects and and moments that really like
use those effects so beautifully. this
incredible scene that I think holds up
very well where, you know, after he's
he's escaped this memory implantation
lab and he people are after him and and
he realizes he's a spy and he has to
remove what he's been told is a tracking
device in his skull somewhere.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Yeah. You remember this scene?
>> Howdy, stranger. This is Hower.
>> He's watching a screen. He's been given
a suitcase of supplies. Very like born
identity sort of like here's all the
money you need and fake IDs. He's
watching a screen of himself telling
himself what to do.
>> Now, whatever your name is, get ready
for the big surprise.
>> You do see levels to the acting here
because he really does play this. Yeah,
>> I think this is his best performance.
>> Really?
>> I do. Wow.
>> We can go come back to this.
>> And he's telling him, you got to take
this little metal gun that I've given
you and stick it up your nose until you
hear a crunch.
>> And Arie is pushing so hard and it
crunches so loud. And then, don't worry,
it's self-guiding. And these little
pincers come out and pull out and you
see his face kind of warp in special
effects mask mode, but it still looks so
great. Yeah.
>> And this giant
throbbing, pulsing red thing comes out
of his nostril.
>> Yeah.
>> And cracks open and then sure enough is
this little metal tracking device.
>> Yeah.
>> And uh I mean just what could be better?
What could be better?
>> Do you remember talking to each other
during the movie? Were you guys were you
guys as voseiferous as as as the people
at the Philadelphia Chestnut Hill Sam
Eric Jammy Jam that I would see my
movies at work were?
>> This is very interesting because I think
you and I are different people in
certain ways and have had different
experiences.
>> Yes.
>> In the United States of America. I grew
up all the way on the west coast in a
very kind of suburban nowhere place.
That's where I lived when I saw this
film. Loi, California, known for its
dairy cows and its vineyards
>> and
very white, very Lutheran, very rule
following. So, we wouldn't have been it
would have been very strange for us to
be shouting at the screen, but I think
we were we were at least
>> we were at least bouncing in our seats.
We were at le because I don't remember
honestly. I think it's
>> was it like
>> I think it's the only film I've seen
multiple times in the theater cuz I went
back.
>> You went multiple times?
>> Yeah, multiple times.
>> Okay.
>> And have no regrets about that. This was
the most excited I've ever been at a
film
>> ever.
>> Yeah.
>> Wow. Can you say more about that? Like
what
>> what hadn't you been given
and what what was this movie giving you?
I think it was a kind of perfect blend
of
truly cutting edge action stuff. So the
the special effects, there's an
incredible scene where Arnold is wearing
this giant disguised suit of a woman.
>> This is the most famous sequence in the
movie probably
>> and his head kind of comes apart and
comes off and these things just looked
incredible at the time. pulls the head
off of this woman's head off and it kind
of like um pyramids open essentially and
he pulls it off and it's Arnold in
disguise.
>> Lots of amazing effects like that and
that's what my soul was thirsty for when
I went to see an action movie. The too
muchness of it was exactly what we
wanted as adolescent boys. You know,
there's all these ridiculous oneliners
thrown in.
>> Now this is the plan. Get your ass to
Mars. Arie is just strutting around
snuffing people out and saying the
dumbest kind of like knockoff James Bond
oneliners.
>> You think this is the real Quake? It is.
>> This is another thing about about the
summer movie, right? Like no matter what
the movie is, it needs a catchline,
right? It needs a catchphrase, something
that you as a kid will be quoting for
the rest of the summer. I don't know if
you had one from Total Recall, but there
were definitely consider that a divorce
was one of those things that I remember
saying to other kids
>> just at random. Sweetheart, we're
married.
>> Bang.
>> Consider that a divorce.
Consider that a divorce, he says. Cool
as a cucumber.
>> I mean, he was proud of that line. There
was a look of utter delight. I'm also
curious about
whether anything else from that period
was doing anything like what Total
Recall was doing for you.
>> That's a great question. You know, I
think like I loved Die Hard
>> and I loved all these comedies. I think
Total Recall kind of brought it all
together. Mhm. Mhm.
>> And the part of my brain that was
curious and thoughtful and and wanted to
think a little bit more sophisticated
thoughts, like it was this mindbending
sci-fi premise that was in there, too.
So, it was kind of everything in one
movie.
>> But I'm also curious about what or
whether or not
the sexual dimensions were occurring to
you, right? Cuz this movie is also I
mean, it's just very
>> it's sexual, right? Like there's there's
the marriage between Sharon Stone and
Arnold Schwarzenegger, which is really a
sexual relationship if once you find out
what's going on there,
>> right?
>> Um he's in love with what I'm going to
describe as a fantasy woman.
>> Um and Rachel Tickotin, who turns out to
be real and then mad at him for
fantasizing about Sharon Stone, who is
mad at him for fantasizing about Rachel
Tickotin. Right. Right. He's got Betty
and Veronica, the blonde and the
brunette. Mhm.
>> Um both both very appealing people
played by good actors. Um especially
Sharon Stone's later scenes in this
movie. She's very good in those
auditioning basically for to work with
Verhovven again on Basic Instinct.
>> Um but I'm like what was the sex doing
for you?
>> Oh my gosh.
>> There's a woman in this movie with three
breasts.
>> Yeah. I I was wondering if we were bring
that up. I mean this is probably right.
This Okay. Back then I wouldn't have
known. I wouldn't have thought. I mean
certainly
>> that image stuck with me
>> and is very embarrassing to think back
on. Um uh
>> because because why?
>> When I Googled Total Recall, one of the
you know people also asked questions
that came up was what is the most paused
moment in Total Recall? And it's this
moment
>> they go to Venusville. Yes.
>> The kind of red light district of Mars
where there all these prostitutes
gambling. Exactly. And there is this
woman who who offers herself to Arnold
and uh expo and opens her shirt and she
has three breasts,
>> which
>> I think to me as a 12-year-old boy was
the absolute limit of the human
imagination and what it might be able to
offer us someday. Like like just it's
it's so embarrassing. A third breast.
>> But you knew. But is the thing that's
embarrassing? Are you embarrassed now or
were you embarrassed at 12?
>> All of it.
>> Okay. So, what's embarrassing?
>> I And I will be embarrassed in the
future
>> when it's 2084
before you brought it up.
>> This breast is going to haunt you.
>> Yes.
>> But but can I just ask like what is
embarrassing about it now? Did you find
it arousing?
>> Was it attractive?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Okay.
>> Okay. Uh, and uh, what's embar I mean,
do I have to explain what's embarrassing
about that?
>> Yeah, maybe a little bit to me.
>> Uh, did you find it arousing?
>> Well,
>> I don't think we can talk about this on
the podcast.
>> Kind of the wrong audience.
>> I know, but still.
>> But I mean, I I actually do find that
the movie does have like a lot of the
movies during this period, an eroticism,
right? like an erotic fantasy of being
able to choose between two women, being
able to choose the type of woman you
want to spend the rest of your life
with. What qualities would you like this
creature to have?
>> It's a very sexist movie. I think it's
fair to say.
>> Yeah. Well,
>> is that part of what's embarrassing for
you, though?
>> Yeah, for sure. For sure. I mean, the
women are not the the movie is not
interested in in the women.
>> Yes and no. I mean, it's not about the
women at all. I'm not under no
assumptions. Like
>> the women are sidekicks. They are turn
coats.
>> Yeah.
>> They are, you know, almost literal
castrators.
>> Yeah.
>> Um but they're not uninteresting at the
same time to me.
>> The third breast is very interesting.
>> Oh, she's not her.
>> Well, my I watched it uh a couple days
ago with my son who's 17.
>> Okay.
>> And said this was my favorite movie on
earth when I was 12 years old.
>> Uh oh. And um one of his comments
afterwards was the woman with the extra
boob, she got a lot more screen time
than I expected.
I thought when she came on screen that
was pretty much going to be it, but no,
she comes back several times and there
are kind of sight gags and and oneliners
and then she gets machine gunned in the
back.
>> Yeah. and everybody just dies a horrible
death either because they're deprived of
oxygen or,
>> you know, they're gunned down in a in a
barroom fight.
>> Um, so all right,
>> this movie is full of
hard to forget imagery. M
>> I am curious if there is a sequence or
image or moment from this movie that is
just lodged in your brain and living
there forever either as 13-year-old you
or like you went back and watched it and
remembered something
>> that you'd forgotten meant something to
13-year-old you. M it was this moment
where Arnold is being chased through the
subway up an escalator and and the
machine gun fire is just I mean it's
like people are must be breathing
machine gun bullets because that's just
filling the air and and
>> I mean I I God bless you. Go on.
>> And Arnold to protect himself grabs hold
of a man who's just been shot next to
him on the escalator and uses him as a
human shield.
>> Yeah. Here we go. He's running. There's
Michael Ironside. One of the great
figures in 80s 90s B-level action. Maybe
even D-level action.
>> Cut rate Jack Nicholson.
>> Yes. Yes. Exactly.
>> Off-brand Jack Nicholson.
>> Off offbrand Jack Nicholson. So Arnold
is headed up the longest escalator
in the history of movies and he's got
his gun out and these these goons are
chasing him
>> and he got machine gun fire from above
and coming from below.
>> Yes. He and he's grabbed this poor now
corpse and is using him to def to stop
himself from being shot. And this guy
must be made of Kevlar himself.
>> And he is ground beef at this point. And
and
>> and the hamburger just took a
sail down the escalator.
>> Verhovven makes such a meal of that
moment. Like you maybe a human shield
had been used in a film shootout before.
I don't remember that. But for me like
this was one of the central like
mind-blowing moments in the film to just
that kind of uh fighting strategy to
just use a guy to to save yourself. And
the guy it goes on for a long time and
that body is just getting ripped up,
>> turned into hamburger. very chunky kind
of violence.
>> What is this man made of, by the way?
>> And then he swings it. Yeah. To block
fire coming from the other way and then
he throws it as a projectile. And it's
like that blew my mind and I could not
have loved it more. And I remembered it
for decades. And then I sat down the
other night to rewatch this as a
responsible grown-up man with two
children
>> and
I was pretty horrified by I mean just
the casualenness of this violence public
uh machine gun fire means something very
different I think in 2025 than it did in
1990 after wave after wave after wave of
mass shootings. It's hard to be
delighted at anything that's going on
there. And then the notion that you
would just grab a guy who was a real
human man standing next to you who's now
just dead and it doesn't really bother
you because he's tactically useful to
you at that moment. This notion that
like other human beings are NPCs or sort
of non-player characters to be used in
your adventure story is pretty
disgusting morally.
>> Yes.
>> So, I wasn't really down with the human
shield scene so much. Like that to me,
what you've identified as this moral
disjunction
>> has always troubled me about the
Hollywood approach to action movies
>> because you know to this day in so many
movies there is a sequence in a movie
purportedly about saving humanity from
some terribly destructive force be they
terrorists or you know some corporation
that wants your memories back. There's
an indifference to who matters in the
scheme of the moral arc of the movie,
>> right?
>> And this poor, you know, hunk of meat
>> y
>> is irrelevant. And whether it's, you
know, a chase sequence that destroys a
market in in, you know, Morocco just so
like Will Smith and Martin Lawrence can
get away with whatever it is, you know,
can catch the bad guys or Vin Diesel in
The Rock can catch the bad guys. I've
always found that troubling.
>> Okay.
>> Like what happens
>> when these guys leave town when they're
just when they when they're on to the
next scene that we are watching in the
movie? What happens to that to that
basket seller?
>> I think that speaks very of you. That
speaks very well of you and your mother.
>> Oh well,
>> cuz I didn't notice.
>> I didn't notice and I wouldn't have
understood it in those terms until uh I
was pretty old. And to me, I think the
summer movie in general, the the action
movie in general, Total Recall in
particular, is a way for like for me as
a 12-year-old, I was just kind of
mainlining
American culture and mythology.
>> Me, too. And what it was feeding me I
can see now is pretty troubling that we
are this um special society of
individuals the first society on earth
ever made of pure individuals and we're
not that worried about this collective
cuz that's smacks of communism or
whatever. So there's this tension
between, you know, the community and the
individual. And in an action movie, you
have kind of the apotheiois. You have
kind of the the pinnacle of that
worldview as if it is real when it's so
ridiculously unreal. I mean, the social
dynamics like
>> I would love to watch a movie actually
about that man on the escalator who
turns into the human shield leading his
life,
>> his whole day
>> just like a character study. Yes. No.
Start like what was he born in like 204?
>> Go all the way back. I want a just a
coming of age story about this man and
the job he got and the incredible day he
was about to have and get ripped up and
thrown.
>> This is me in in the Moroccan basket. I
just I think about them all the time.
Okay, so
>> wait, did you see this movie
>> in the theater? You saw it alone in a
theater? I did.
>> And what what was your quickly what was
your response?
>> I was really looking forward to spending
more time with Sharon Stone, honestly. I
mean, just as a movie go, like I just
Arnold Schwarzenegger didn't really do
it for me. And I think that my like
mediocre experience at Total Recall made
me not interested in any other action
movie that was coming out that summer.
>> Wow.
>> I will tell you what I was truly
interested in.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh if you're curious to know
>> what my total recall was of 1990. Yeah.
>> The summer of 1990,
>> the movie I saw three times. I mentioned
it earlier, but it was Ghost. I can't
believe it was Ghost.
>> I did. I saw that movie three times. I'm
not lying.
>> Three times?
>> I did. I saw it three times.
>> Did Did you see it three times on the
same day?
>> No.
>> No. I like one of the pleasures of the
of the of the summer movie going
experience for me was I mean I was
sneaking into these movies and so I
never really I had a plan but sometimes
I'd get greedy and I would go into
other movies that I'd already seen
because I just missed them
>> and Ghost was one of those movies I just
really enjoyed.
>> Who was Wesley Morris in the summer of
1990?
I mean, I would have been not working
home from school, really really excited
to just like be able to go out in the
city and I'm from Philadelphia. Uh, I
lived in Philadelphia and I was
permitted to leave the house and do my
business.
>> And you would you would go would would
you wander far and wide or were you you
were going to the theater and you were
spending hours there?
>> No. No. I was basically a
like pre-teen teenage finner. Like I
would just roam the streets of
Philadelphia just walking. I mean mostly
downtown, but I walked around my
neighborhood. Okay. I loved walking
around the mall. I loved like watching
people.
>> I loved studying how people behaved,
what they wore.
>> Okay. So, you're walking around
Philadelphia just inhaling
the universe into your consciousness and
then you go into the theater and sit in
the dark and inhale this kind of the
cinematic universe that 1990 is making
available to you.
>> Yes.
>> And Ghost is the film that leaps out and
really touches you. What was your
experience of seeing Ghost? Once I got
wind of the fact the ghost was coming
because they had this ghost had a really
really sexy poster.
>> Yeah.
>> And it was a it's the poster if memory
serves is deme and Patrick sees in a
kind of overlit embrace.
>> Right. So you see a movie poster with
these two actors bathed in a heavenly
light about to embrace.
>> But that's not what it was for me. Sam.
>> No.
>> It was Whoopie Goldberg. I'm like, what
is this? What is my favorite actor
>> doing?
>> Your favorite actor.
>> Oh, yeah. She was definitely by 80 by
1990, she would have been in The Color
Purple, one of a Wesley Morris Sleeper
called Burglar, Jumping Jack Flash, and
uh a movie nobody saw called The
Telephone. I think it went straight to
VHS, and Fatal Beauty.
>> She interestingly is not on the poster.
Definitely not on the poster.
>> But that's Whoopi is your main
>> I am going to see Whoopi Goldberg
perform.
>> Molly,
you and Danger Girl.
>> Dei Moore is interesting to me. Uh she's
a cable movie person or a cable TV
person to me. Like I just know her from
movies on cable and sees dirty dancing
very attracted.
Let's go. I'll do it. And so I go on the
opening Saturday
and it's the first movie I see and I'm
automatically in when you get this trick
of the opening tracking shot around like
what looks like a dusty basement.
>> Yep.
>> And spooky. It's a spooky opening.
>> Yeah. So you think a movie called Ghost?
There must there must be something there
must be a ghost in this in this basement
area or like it there's some light. So,
I don't know how it registered to me,
but definitely a scary space. And you're
getting the credits, the screen is
black,
>> and then all of a sudden,
>> the ceiling is broken,
>> and light comes through, and you're
watching Dememore, Tony Goldwin, and
Patrick Sees
discover that this property they bought
has a whole other floor or something. I
don't know what the real estate deal is
here. We could do a whole separate
episode on the real estate.
>> This is really deep. Anyway, I just I I
really what I was responding to in this
movie. I thought at first was this love
story between this man and this woman.
He gets murdered and she is left to pick
up the pieces, but he has a moment where
he it looks like heaven is coming to him
and then all of a sudden it's like,
"Nah, never mind. We'll we'll come for
you later."
>> Right? There's a shaft of light with
little uh twinkling fireflies fluttering
down. The the kind of the special
effects in this movie
>> suck.
They look so bad today. Total recall
looks amazing still. And these look
>> But do you know why?
>> Because they the total the total recall
effects are done in camera.
>> Right. Right. Right.
>> They're not doing a lot of postp
production work
>> on the effects and total recall. all the
effects in this movie because
everybody's he's like, you know, the
effects here are, can Patrick sees walk
through this door? Can can this hospital
attendant push this this gurnie through
Patrick sees? You got to do that. You
got to fake that.
>> Right. Right. Right.
>> Um anyway, yes, you're right. This is
>> so he does not accept the shaft of
heavenly light. He turns back and stays
in the world with the rest of the
living, but he's a ghost. and he comes
to understand that something weird might
be happening with his death. He doesn't
know exactly what it is, but there's
something fishy going on. And he is
wandering the streets kind of miserable
that maybe Molly, the Deme Moore
character, is moving on without him. And
one day he's in Brooklyn and what he
hears is gospel music on the street. and
he is somehow as this ghost responding
to gospel music. There is a there is a
black woman singing and he's like, "Yes,
I am going to catch the spirit." And he
goes in to what turns out to be a
storefront psychic shop,
>> right?
>> The psychic is Whoopy Goldberg. And
there's this, she makes a great entrance
at the 39th minute.
>> Sister Odmade, grant us the gift of your
allseeing presence. appear before us
now.
>> Mrs. Santiago.
>> Yes. The entire movie changes when she
comes in.
>> The tone of it, the pace of it,
everything about the film changes.
>> And she comes out and she's wearing this
great lame mumu. And her hair, she's
been given this big blown out wig. her.
So her hair is straight and huge and she
she sits down and she starts to practice
her storefront psychic, you know,
fraudulence.
>> Right. She's a scam artist.
>> Exactly. I want to just play this scene
because it's it's incredible.
>> Yeah.
>> Um I mean in in in the scheme of this
movie and as a reorientation of its
priorities.
>> Yes.
>> As as a storyline. So, it's it's OD
Brown as Whoopi Goldberg's character.
She's there with her two sisters on
either side of her.
>> Did he know someone by the name of Anna?
>> She's got a crystal ball on the table.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. She's not using it. No.
>> Julieta,
>> she's exasperated at Maria. She's like,
"Is this right?"
>> His mama. She is Maria.
>> Yes. Praise God. I knew he was with his
mama.
So she hears that her eyes start to do
she's doing a lot of eye work in this
movie.
>> I pay more.
>> She's like, "I can't do it. You can't do
it. I can't take your money."
>> Oh, way to go. Milk her for every penny.
>> So she's looking around like, "What? Did
you guys hear that?" And the sisters
don't hear anything,
>> right? They think she's losing her mind.
>> And so the the cash has been accepted
for this new attempt to get a name. And
the sisters are confused cuz Whoopi is
looking around like, "Where is this
voice coming from?"
>> And her her golden moo is gliding. Yes.
Yes. Yes.
>> Believe we can start again.
>> So she starts again and Patrick is
shaking his head.
>> Praise the Lord.
>> She's convulsing. This actress also
playing the client. Her belief is so
touching.
>> Mhm.
>> This is Santiago. In our father's
kingdom, we are all handsome.
>> I just remember finding this so funny.
Yeah,
>> I sat there and laughed at this.
>> Who is that?
>> So Patrick sees now the one in disbelief
that she can hear him. So they're having
this mutual shock, but it's repelling
each other there. It's repelling her
from him.
>> And the shot here, the camera,
>> the camera is spinning around as they're
chasing each other around the table.
Hey, you
>> I remember being a kid and finding it so
moving that this woman who she clearly
doesn't believe she has this power,
>> right,
>> suddenly realizes once this man shows up
that she does have it.
>> Mhm.
>> And
I found the I can only use grown-up
language to describe what I felt as a
kid.
>> Sure. But I was so fascinated that this
white man had gone into this black
woman's universe and was interested in
communicating with her, realized he
could, and she realizes that he can, but
she doesn't want it, and he does.
>> And so there's this whole
>> I don't know that really
it the the being seen part. Hm.
>> The movie has an awareness of the racial
dynamic. So, she finally he finally
explains to her what's going on. She's
very annoyed. She's, "Are you white?"
>> That's an amazing scene when she's I
mean, cuz she can't see him. She can
just hear him.
>> All she can hear is
>> And so he's she's constantly saying,
"Where are you?" And he's like, "I'm
right. I'm across the table or
whatever." And at a certain point, she's
like, "Are you white?"
>> Yeah.
>> He doesn't answer, by the way. Does he
not?
>> He does not say, "Yes, I am." She just
he just is like, "Oh god, what is going
on here?"
>> And then she's like, "Why me?" Yeah.
>> No, there's a very interesting racial
dynamic. And then you get this kind of I
mean, this white man who needs her for
something and needs her body whole self,
>> needs her needs her body. He doesn't
have one. And he needs her body to go
around the city and solve this mystery
for him. And they become this kind of
odd couple of detectives.
>> Now listen, I need to be 14 here. Mhm.
>> I don't want to be this age.
>> Okay.
>> I only kind of want to talk about this
movie.
>> Well, that's not how this works.
>> As a 14,
>> I had to do Total Recall as a grownup
man.
>> Well, okay. I think the the racial truth
of this movie is the third breast of
Ghost for me.
>> Yeah, I agree. I love nothing more than
thinking about young Wesley in 1990. And
and so you're sitting here some help.
You're on the edge of your seat and
you're watching this film and you watch
it and you're processing all these
complicated things and then you decide
you have to go back and then you decide
you have to go back again. Why? What was
it about this? Do you think this is a
great film?
>> No. So, what was it that drew you in?
>> I think it's been clear so far that the
the greatness the greatness of the movie
doesn't matter with summer movies. It's
not important,
>> right?
>> But the answer is is like immediately
no. It's not a great movie. It's like
sort of a good movie, but its goodness
is in how satisfying a moviegoing
experience it is. Right. Right. It's got
a great premise. It's a mystery, a
romance, a body
>> swapish comedy. I will tell you that the
third time I saw it, I really wanted to
hear people respond
>> to the Whoopi Goldberg parts.
>> That's amazing.
>> I just loved hearing people love her.
>> Wow.
>> I loved that. It was just the sound of a
of a packed house or pretty packed house
like cracking up legit like with Whoopi
Goldberg, right? I would turn around and
just look at the house laughing cuz I
already knew what was coming. I wasn't
going to miss anything she was doing. Oh
yeah, I'd still do that. I still look at
people.
>> You watch the people watching the movie.
>> Even Yeah. Even today, I still turn
around and watch people watch the movie.
>> Whoa.
>> Every once in a while. Yeah. I love I
love that.
>> I don't think I've ever done that in my
whole entire life.
>> Also, think about how many shots in
movies you get of people watching movies
and how
>> fake they are. I love watching the real
[__]
>> right? I love just turning around and
seeing people just be like
>> whatevering in response to something.
The point is I I I just really my heart
was so full
>> at the appreciation that America had.
This was America's This was the number
one movie of 1990. not the summer of
1990, but the whole year.
>> Mhm.
>> And my heart was full as a 14year-old
at the fact that I knew and I could see
it watching it today, you know, as an
adult. I knew as at 14 that the only
reason that movie was working was
because Whoopi was making it work.
>> Y
>> she's the movie.
>> She is.
>> I mean, she won an Academy Award, we
should say. have buried a very major
lead here. Whoopy Goldberg won an Oscar
for playing this part.
>> I didn't remember that.
>> She beat some crazy people. Lorraine
Broco and Good Fellas, Annette Benning
in the Grifters, Diane Lad in in uh Wild
at Heart. Like, she beat some great
people for that Oscar.
>> Deservedly so, because I wasn't loving
this movie until she came into it.
>> She is so alive.
>> She's a movie star.
>> Whoopi just is on a different level.
Watching it now as an adult, I'm aware
of in the same way that I think you are
going back to Total Recall, there's just
nothing like this happening in the big
Hollywood movies we get in the summer
now.
>> I have never been a declinist really.
So, so, so I always think, you know,
there's the summer movie has changed for
sure.
>> Yes.
>> Very different. And there's a whole
economic kind of super structure behind
that and cultural differences.
>> Whole other huge forces, right? Right.
>> But important ones that have direct
bearing on the nature of the movies we
get now versus the ones we got like the
summer movie we should say is a is a
development of the in the last 50 years
of movie going. The summer movie begins
>> the idea of a summer movie begins in 75
1975 with Jaws
>> with Jaws. Did I really nail that?
>> You dingdy ding ding ding
>> just pulled it right.
>> Yes. Jaws. Jaws starts Jaws is 50 years
old this year.
>> Okay. So it the summer movie is a
historical thing. People no doubt were
saying from 1975 on, certainly in 1990,
looking at the slate of summer movies
coming out that year and saying this is
garbage and humanity is dying and the
people watch the young kids in
Philadelphia and Loi, California
watching this slop
are being spiritually diminished
>> in a way they will have no idea about.
Right? I mean, people have always said
these things. But but there are these
shifts generationally in terms of the
way these movies have been received,
right? Jaws, the biggest movie of 75,
right? Like a world conquering
paradigm shifting entertainment idea
>> in 75. Setting aside like the actual
brilliance of Stephen Spielberg's film
making in the movie itself, right? just
what it signified for the industry was
received as a death nail,
>> right?
>> Because it then meant that these studios
were then going to be programming movies
>> to play in the summer
>> and it was going to bastardize a whole
>> zone of ideas and ideas making, right?
July,
>> right?
>> Right.
I mean, we've we've always been in a in
a in a freef fall from something and
we've always been producing greatness at
whatever moment we're in. And I think we
still are in certain ways. I saw the
Minecraft movie.
>> I saw it with my son
>> and
>> I enjoyed it. Okay.
>> You know why?
>> Because
>> cuz there's a movie star in it.
>> Yes.
>> Jack Black is incredible in that film.
People are throwing popcorn at the
screen and they're screaming and they're
singing. My son's friends were there
from high school and they were shouting
and singing along and like and and it's
a big rockus fun summer movie experience
and it really felt like that and I don't
care about the Minecraftness of it in
the same way I don't care about the the
twirling twinkling lights of heaven and
ghost. It's Whoopy Goldberg and it's
Jack Black and that's good.
>> I have two thoughts about that.
>> Okay.
>> Thought number one is I just want to be
clear this is a spring movie.
>> That's true.
>> Minecraft is officially not a summer
movie.
>> Oh yeah. Okay,
>> that's a
>> huh
>> b this is a movie based on a video game.
>> Right. So there's a way in which there's
a snake eating its tail aspect of the
Minecraft success.
>> Sure.
>> And it that's disturbing to me because
in 1990
I I was not being given anything that
I'd previously had before except maybe
some movie stars and some genres. I mean
I don't know. You're going to be you're
going to now say something very
sophisticated.
>> Absolutely am.
>> But it is it is on its face different.
>> I think you are a little bit old man
shouting at cloud.
>> I'm not.
>> I think in 90 we we were getting you
know you were going to see Whoopy
Goldberg. I was going to see Arnold
Schwarzenegger and I was going to see
some Star Wars like spectacle of
violence and chasing and whatever and
>> but it wasn't Star Wars.
>> These have always been snakes eating
their own tails. That's all the movies
is. Look at Buster Keaton making movies
about movies.
>> No, they're they're like at best, right?
Like at their best,
>> it's it's skin shedding, right?
>> It's snakes eating other animals,
>> right? Yeah.
>> It's not what we're getting now, which
is like a closed loop.
>> Yep.
>> So, I don't know. It just feels like I'm
just grateful for this experience
because I don't think we're sitting here
talking to each other if I have a
different one.
>> Yeah. I am very glad that you loved
Ghost as much as you did back in the
summer of 1990 and that I got to hear
you talk about it.
>> Um I feel the same way.
>> Sam, can you feel me
>> with all my heart
says with all his heart?
[Music]
Oh,
>> my darling.
>> Oh my god.
>> Yeah,
>> I hunger for your touch. Keep going.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay, Sam. Um, thank you for coming to
talk to me.
>> Thanks for having me. I got so excited
when you sent me that list of 1990
movies.
>> You responded immediately.
>> Yeah, that usually doesn't happen. But I
saw Total Recall on that list and then I
forced you to talk about it. Um, thanks.
>> Thanks for having me on.
>> Of course.
>> Yeah.
>> Consider that a divorce.
>> I don't want to divorce yourself.
>> I'll see you at the party.
[Music]